We fully endorse the [Agile Manifesto](https://agilemanifesto.org/iso/de/manifesto.html):

#### Individuals and Interactions over Processes and Tools

The focus is on people, and direct communication is more important than formalities. This means that no matter how sophisticated and well-documented a process is, it cannot replace a personal conversation. Personal exchange is crucial; it helps individuals, teams, and projects. The individuals involved in our projects are not just part of a process chain; they are people with needs and goals. Knowing and caring about these people is tremendously helpful. The greater the familiarity and trust, the easier the collaboration. This positively impacts the working atmosphere and the project.

#### Working Software over Comprehensive Documentation

Concrete work results instead of checklists, slide decks, or long emails. In large organizations with a traditional project culture, more time is often spent creating slide decks for steering committees than on completing the actual task. As a client recently aptly put it, "here, we once again have more managers in the project than people working on the product...". We want as much of our time and, consequently, as much of the budget as possible to be visible in the work results. We need to be mindful of this. If a 3-minute phone call can clarify the matter, we prefer it over an email that would take 15 minutes to write. If the Product Owner or sponsor needs input for their presentation, we ask if bullet points are sufficient, etc.

#### Collaboration with the Customer over Contract Negotiation

The customer plays a central role in the work of our teams. With their needs and issues, they are an essential part of the team. A (personal) engagement with the customer is more important than a formal and watertight contract. This point, too, places direct exchange above formalities. The goal is to work together with the customer and other process participants as a unified team. There is a direct dependency. We don't want to fall into an "us-against-them" mode. This becomes apparent in projects when attempts are made to build "paperwork" that can be used as a basis for demanding things. This doesn't mean that we don't want to write or document anything, but it means that we don't want to create paperwork that then needs to be worked against. It is essential to interact with individuals and address individuals. Once we abstract, an "us-and-them" or, worse, an "us-against-them" mentality forms. Cooperation becomes more challenging at this point. Therefore, speak with and to individuals instead of "the translators," "management," or "IT."

#### Responding to Change over Following a Plan

As an organization and team, we are very flexible and adaptable. However, this does not mean that we operate without a plan, arbitrarily, or chaotically. We are focused on a goal but also willingly deviate from the original plan if it makes sense for us and the project, with the prospect of providing a higher value contribution. Extremely important! A plan should give us a structure to reach a goal. The goal is to get as close to the goal as possible, not to follow the plan. That is a fundamental difference. Often, the attitude is as follows: we have a goal and make a plan to achieve this goal. From then on, only the plan is pursued. Sometimes, the goal is lost sight of. We learn along the way, and that changes the plan and sometimes the goal.